Add description of TraceState operations (#905)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/sdk.md

  (for example, the `Span` could be one of the parameters passed to such a function,
  or a getter could be provided).
  
## TraceState manipulation

`TraceState` is a part of [`SpanContext`](./api.md#spancontext), represented by a list of key-values pairs and
 formally defined by [W3C specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#tracestate-header).
Tracing SDK MUST provide at least the following mutation operations on `TraceState`:

* Update key value
* Add a new key/value pair
* Delete a key/value pair

These operations MUST follow rules described in [W3C specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#mutating-the-tracestate-field).

Please note, that as `SpanContext` is immutable, it is not possible to update `SpanContext` with a new `TraceState`.
Such changes then make sense only right before 
[`SpanContext` propagation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/context/api-propagators.md) 
or [telemetry data exporting](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/sdk.md#span-exporter).

> In both cases `Propagators` and `SpanExporters` may modify `TraceState` before serializing it to the wire.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In both cases `Propagators` and `SpanExporters` may create a modified `TraceState` copy before serializing it to the wire.
```

  (for example, the `Span` could be one of the parameters passed to such a function,
  or a getter could be provided).
  
## TraceState

`TraceState` is a part of [`SpanContext`](./api.md#spancontext), represented by an immutable list of string key/value pairs and
formally defined by the [W3C Trace Context specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#tracestate-header).
Tracing SDK MUST provide at least the following operations on `TraceState`:

* Get value for a given key
* Add a new key/value pair
* Update an existing value for a given key
* Delete a key/value pair

These operations MUST follow the rules described in the [W3C Trace Context specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#mutating-the-tracestate-field).
All mutating operations MUST return a new `TraceState` with the modifications applied.
`TraceState` MUST at all times be valid according to rules specified in [W3C Trace Context specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#tracestate-header-field-values).
Every mutating operations MUST validate input parameters.
If invalid value is passed the operation MUST NOT return `TraceState` containing invalid data

> and SHOULD signal an error situation in a language specific way (e.g. throw an exception in java, return error value in Go, etc).

Reviewer: It MUST NOT throw an exception, see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/error-handling.md#basic-error-handling-principles

```suggestion
and MUST follow the [general error handling guidelines](../error-handling.md) (e.g. it usually most not return null or throw an exception).
```

Author: damn :)

  (for example, the `Span` could be one of the parameters passed to such a function,
  or a getter could be provided).
  
## TraceState manipulation

> `TraceState` is a part of [`SpanContext`](./api.md#spancontext), represented by a list of string key-values pairs and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`TraceState` is a part of [`SpanContext`](./api.md#spancontext), represented by a list of string key-value pairs and
```

>  formally defined by [W3C specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#tracestate-header).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
formally defined by the [W3C Trace Context specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#tracestate-header).
```

> Tracing SDK MUST provide at least the following operations on `TraceState` which return a new `TraceState` with the modifications applied:

Reviewer: Why in the SDK? The TraceState is defined in the API. If these are utility functions it would indeed make sense to have them in the SDK or a separate artifact, but we should be a bit more explicit here.

Author: Because user is not going to change `TraceState`. These operations are for SDK only and even only for some parts of SDK. I am not even sure that we should expose `TraceState` in API in the first place.

Reviewer: Since SpanContext is a final class in the API, it will be difficult to not expose it.

Author: That's why I have not blown the scope and am proposing only those changes that were discussed in the ticket. Do you see any need for TraceState mutation operations to be present in API?

Reviewer: No. I'm just wondering about implementability.

Reviewer 3: One theoretical example I have for TraceState manipulation from API is when Instrumentation Library needs to propagate an extra context to the backend. For example, it can be library-defined operation ID (or retry cunt), or some sort of debug flag/flight ID. Which is totally valid use of TraceState and should not necessarily require a reference to an SDK. These flags would be valid with any SDK/exporter configuration.

I don't think though we need to force to implement this operations in API now, we can always introduce it later when needed. So this comment is not blocking

> * Update key value

Reviewer 3: Also Get key value pair?

Reviewer: Definitely required. Enumerating them might not be necessary, but updating often makes no sense without a get operation.

Reviewer 2: This section lists modifications permitted on TraceState, which also return a new, modified instance, so this enumeration itself is complete. Specifying the get operation as required makes sense, however.

> * Update key value

Reviewer 3: For the consistency with other two items:

```suggestion
* Update key/value
```

> * Update key value
> * Add a new key/value pair

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add a new key/value pair
* Update an existing value
```

"Update key value" sounds like changing the value of the key itself to me.

Author: This was copy-pasted from W3C spec :)

Reviewer 2: I see. We can still do better here in our spec as long as it's just about wording, however 😉

* Delete a key/value pair

> These operations MUST follow rules described in [W3C specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#mutating-the-tracestate-field).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These operations MUST follow the rules described in the [W3C Trace Context specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#mutating-the-tracestate-field).
```

> These operations MUST follow the rules described in the [W3C Trace Context specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#mutating-the-tracestate-field).

Reviewer 4: If the operation is invalid (e.g. adding a new key/value pair which has illegal characters), what should be the return value? Here are the options:
1. Return a special NULL value (e.g. null reference, nullptr, NULL pointer or a special INVALID_TRACE_STATE).
2. Return the previous value (basically making the function no-op).
3. Have a mechanism reporting error (e.g. error code, exception).

Reviewer: I think we should not apply any limitations until we extract/inject. The tracestate on the SpanContext may actually end up in a propagator that has a different defintion of "illegal".

Reviewer 4: I think this part needs to be clarified. For example: `UpdateTraceContext(traceContext, key, invalid_value)` in this case will end up with `invalid_value`.

Reviewer: It is invalid only for W3C (de)serialization however. The two cases for invalid values would be overly long and containing `,`, right?

Reviewer: Definitely needs to be clarified though, I would even call it "decided" 😃

Reviewer: A disadvantage of allowing some kinds of invalid keys/values (I think only keys containing `=` and values containing `,` is that it makes storing the tracestate unmodified as a single string impossible (it at least requires auxilary storage in case someone modifies the tracestate in-between)

Author: I prefer more strict approach. If we reference the spec, which contains validation rules, then every operation on `TraceState` must preserve invariant of having valid value and to discard invalid ones as soon as possible. This means every attempt of invalid operation must signal an error in the language specific way (exception in Java, error code in Go etc).

Reviewer: I assume you want to define "valid on OpenTelemetry TraceState" as "valid on W3C TraceState"? What about transporting jaeger baggage? Would it be transported over this TraceContext too? Would it be OK to discard non-W3C compliant values?

Reviewer: I guess it's OK with me. Relaxing restrictions later is a non-breaking change (as long as implementations take care not to expose any internal representation as a string too directly), but not the other way round. If you write that down in the spec, then it's OK for me. Being vague with error handling is OK, this is a thing where languages differ wildly and we have general error handling guidelines already. So just writing "Keys and values MUST be valid for W3C tracestate. All functions MUST keep the W3C tracestate valid." I wonder if we also want to observe length limitations. If so I'd add "This includes dropping the oldest tracestate key-value pairs until the new key-value pair fits in if the length would be exceeded and ignoring any key-value pairs that would be too long." I would prefer "The only exception is the length of both individual keys and values as well as the complete trace state, which is unlimited in-process (the propagator is responsible for dropping overly long values, etc)." This is to allow using TraceState for in-process storage (since that's the only way to propagate custom information with the SpanContext that may be needed by custom propagators or samplers).

Reviewer 3: I agree that starting with strict requirement would be better.

Author: Done.

> Please note, that as `SpanContext` is immutable, it is not possible to update `SpanContext` with a new `TraceState`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please note, since `SpanContext` is immutable, it is not possible to update `SpanContext` with a new `TraceState`.
```

Such changes then make sense only right before
[`SpanContext` propagation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/context/api-propagators.md)
or [telemetry data exporting](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/sdk.md#span-exporter).

> In both cases `Propagators` and `SpanExporters` may create a modified `TraceState` copy before serializing it to the wire.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In both cases, `Propagators` and `SpanExporters` may create a modified `TraceState` copy before serializing it to the wire.
```
